David Schaich (he): Okay, we should be recording
David Schaich (he): one of the promised supplements
David Schaich (he): which in part are going to make up for losing four hours of lectures to bank holidays this May.  Looking in this first
David Schaich (he): supplemental pencast at a fairly brief derivation of the properties, of relativistic ideal fermion gases,
David Schaich (he): and recording this on one of those bank holidays,
David Schaich (he): the eighth of May.  Where
David Schaich (he): the context for looking at relativistic ideal fermion gases, and the reason we can be
David Schaich (he): pretty brief in our treatment of it, is that we have already seen
David Schaich (he): both pieces of the system in different contexts.
David Schaich (he): We have looked at
David Schaich (he): ultra-relativistic systems of bosons, and
David Schaich (he): in particular the certain type of bosons known as photons,
David Schaich (he): particles of light that are massless and ultra-relativistic
David Schaich (he): in that sense. and we can also look at the no temperature good.
David Schaich (he): And
David Schaich (he): it is an interesting question what happens when we slop around these properties we can look at non-relativistic bosomes for ultra-relativistic fermions.
David Schaich (he): The reason we you know consider here just the one. And what the other is that nominal mystic bosons get into some complicated phenomena known as Bose-einstein Compensation.
David Schaich (he): Hey, you very interesting and quantum mechanical effect
David Schaich (he): also awarded with a Nobel prize fairly recently. But I think being able to go to this module
David Schaich (he): in the context of
David Schaich (he): there's an interesting question you can ask
David Schaich (he): which of these 2 properties is the most important
David Schaich (he): behave like we have seen, or
David Schaich (he): this is a contrast between them. Statistics versus for a direct statistics really.
David Schaich (he): and give us more similarity between
the 2 different forcount gases independent of
David Schaich (he): of their energies.
David Schaich (he): Another. The reason to consider the system of there are such things playing an important role in nature.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): an example of
David Schaich (he): between those that's like
David Schaich (he): I mean you can make microwave back on the phone all of space with Actually.
David Schaich (he): we're in, showed
the's every second.
David Schaich (he): There's a large number of you, those out there. and they are very like particles. their masks in every day you. This is
minus 37 power
David Schaich (he): the we which is such a small
David Schaich (he): fraction of the kilogram that is more useful to you. Compare it to
David Schaich (he): the massive electron. The otherwise latest elementary particle is not exactly Nationalist. and here there are there's a ratio without a fact, probability of it.
David Schaich (he): We need it.
David Schaich (he): The electron mass and the heaviest possible between elevators. Experiments have discovered that between those are not exactly massless. But
David Schaich (he): what the mass actually is remains that remains too small for in the existing technology to determine. If there are lots of experiments that are in your way to
David Schaich (he): measure for the first time how massive these between those actually are.
David Schaich (he): But that's a digression. What matters for our purposes is that this mass is so tiny there is.
David Schaich (he): It is, yeah, perfectly good
David Schaich (he): approximation to preview free those and also relativistic particles like photons. Yeah.
David Schaich (he): Neutral energy.
David Schaich (he): either by that week letter new in the subscript.
David Schaich (he): even by the speed of light. which is also the speed of massless neutrinos.
David Schaich (he): good approximation to the actual speed of between those
David Schaich (he): multiplying by.
David Schaich (he): We'll make some of those between those
David Schaich (he): which, just as we did for photos, we could recast, as links called the Beach ball. I'm a steel
David Schaich (he): angular frequency of
David Schaich (he): the neutrino as a wave. Here these frequencies.
David Schaich (he): our conversely related to the wavelength of that way.
David Schaich (he): bye. the speed of light.
David Schaich (he): And if we regulate these systems in a finite volume, give us the usual.
David Schaich (he): the ratio of high over.
David Schaich (he): I'm. Staying in your product. The free vector of the
David Schaich (he): is a strictly positive integer. Again.
David Schaich (he): exactly the same setup as for a photon gas.
David Schaich (he): If there are more similarities between
David Schaich (he): both of those particles, are.
David Schaich (he): it's we have to create and absorb.
David Schaich (he): So we go pieces. You analyze the
David Schaich (he): using. The
David Schaich (he): chemical potential u equals 0.
David Schaich (he): You're not remembering that the chemical potential one of the definitions is the
David Schaich (he): amount of energy that results from changing the part of the number, reading or absorbing between those
David Schaich (he): as they're able to impact on the energy of the system.
David Schaich (he): which is what it means for the chemical potential to be vanishing.
David Schaich (he): If we. this follow the
David Schaich (he): steps that we went through for
David Schaich (he): the photon gas just starting from the very direct distribution.
David Schaich (he): like an economical partition function rather than the both science and the economical partition function.
David Schaich (he): I'll remind you, and you can look up in your notes that those 2 options differ only by certain negative signs. so we can follow exactly the same steps as the proton gas.
David Schaich (he): I'm, arguing that it be a reasonably largely
we have the wavelength we have approximately continuous.
David Schaich (he): and the treat you treat a moment that we can integrate over and
David Schaich (he): converting that to critical coordinates
David Schaich (he): and accounting for what other difference is that between those like electrons have you spin states? Is a degenerate
David Schaich (he): energy levels with the same energy for every
David Schaich (he): combination, all of integer momentum number. rather than the 2 polarizations of
David Schaich (he): those 2 are the same.
David Schaich (he): The different signs are one.
David Schaich (he): It comes out front of the Grand Canonical potential. or for me, on
David Schaich (he): maybe the temperature
function.
David Schaich (he): and there
David Schaich (he): integrated over the positive frequency of the neutrinos
David Schaich (he): an exponential factor.
David Schaich (he): Yes.
David Schaich (he): the log of one plus the exponential.
David Schaich (he): The energy divided by it's not for sure. The different signs that we have here compared to the photon dance are that relative sign
David Schaich (he): inside the algorithm and the that's how Pros.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): office basis. We can't continue deriving all of the usual properties on the gases that we might be interested in. So the
David Schaich (he): first step can be
David Schaich (he): the average particle number and
David Schaich (he): expectation. Now for the number of
how many calls
David Schaich (he): what I do is the the potential with respect to the chemical potential. only setting the chemical potential to 0. After doing all of the mathematical manipulations that we need
David Schaich (he): compute this negative signs. Yes, it helps
David Schaich (he): and then
David Schaich (he): restore the chemical potential that we have set to 0. You can see from all your work that shows up inside
David Schaich (he): E to the view over temperature.
David Schaich (he): which
David Schaich (he): hopefully a
David Schaich (he): familiar derivative to be doing
David Schaich (he): denominator. I'll go ahead and set new to 0 now, so the E to the 0 factor is just a one. I'll make a square
David Schaich (he): setting you to 0. And then the argument to the exponential.
David Schaich (he): maybe that comes down
David Schaich (he): temperature of whatever they want. How cool.
David Schaich (he): so do the usual manipulation of this, like we did for motown gases to file through at the exponential factor of change variables to
David Schaich (he): X is Beta H bar. They go
David Schaich (he): for the temperature.
David Schaich (he): So the 2 powers of Omega and the third d Omega will give us
David Schaich (he): 3 powers of temperature over
David Schaich (he): the integral.
David Schaich (he): Yeah.
David Schaich (he): my is 0 or infinity. So is X, and it
David Schaich (he): X squared over E. Px.
David Schaich (he): Yes.
David Schaich (he): this is another one of those
David Schaich (he): very elegant integrals that you are just going to look out for the purposes of this module
David Schaich (he): we encountered almost the same one.
David Schaich (he): What that positive sign that brings in here Is it overall factor. the one minus 2 squared so 3 quarters and then the same
David Schaich (he): gamma function to 3 and reload Zeta function are going to take 3.
David Schaich (he): So just 3 quarters. I'm. Steve. the role that appears to the
David Schaich (he): so 3
David Schaich (he): you go ahead.
David Schaich (he): The average
David Schaich (he): is.
David Schaich (he): we all say, the function of 3. So 3 quarters on scale of 3 is 2 factorial gives us 3 halves.
They
David Schaich (he): foundation, or always
David Schaich (he): the functional form is the volume. Times temperature queue
David Schaich (he): same functional form that we had for your phone. Yes.
David Schaich (he): so so far, at least, the preliminary answer to our question is that the ultra-relativistic energy seems to be having more of an effect there.
David Schaich (he): The very direct statistics. We have a fine name results that look very much like we go, Tom gas, just with slightly different
David Schaich (he): numerical factors out from the different signs
David Schaich (he): in the
for an economic competition function.
David Schaich (he): We will keep going, aiming ultimately at the equation of State that we used to get their information out.
David Schaich (he): All of the macroscopic properties of this between the gas or
David Schaich (he): relativistic ideal for me, I guess, is more generally so that involves the
David Schaich (he): for sure and
David Schaich (he): well, to get the pressure, we need the internal energy
David Schaich (he): as well.
David Schaich (he): and through the derivation of
David Schaich (he): the equation of state, we will have that pressure and related to
David Schaich (he): average particle number and temperature.
David Schaich (he): So the next piece to look at is the internal energy.
David Schaich (he): And for this just like the
David Schaich (he): relativistic
David Schaich (he): already gone through.
David Schaich (he): You have seen it
David Schaich (he): that within the integral over frequencies we just need to add an extra factor
David Schaich (he): of the energy.
David Schaich (he): Okay.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): which we're going to switch to. Here is
an X on this temperature.
David Schaich (he): So we can.
David Schaich (he): rather than doing a derivative with respect to Beta.
David Schaich (he): another way to get the average internal energy in Canada make use of some of our calculations
to start
David Schaich (he): the average internal. even just by
David Schaich (he): Yeah, yeah, the
David Schaich (he): I was t you have to be 3 plus one
David Schaich (he): is for
David Schaich (he): from high school
David Schaich (he): integrated now over
David Schaich (he): x squared plus one is guess, queued
David Schaich (he): the same denominator to the X plus one.
David Schaich (he): with the additional power of X in the numerator. Here you get in, have.
David Schaich (he): and we want data functions
David Schaich (he): is one minus one over 2 cubed rather than one minus one over 2 squared.
David Schaich (he): The 7 eighths times is 6 times 7, 8 is
David Schaich (he): 7 times 3 quarters.
David Schaich (he): And remember that 3 Mall data function of 4 is a nice converted series
David Schaich (he): to pi it to the fourth power over 90. The next thing
I squared
David Schaich (he): each part of you see
to the fourth.
David Schaich (he): which, if we
David Schaich (he): compare this to the average number density.
David Schaich (he): As for yes. you see that the internal energy is just proportional. 2, the average particle number of times, some additional
David Schaich (he): of the energy. And if we
David Schaich (he): to determine this explicit.
David Schaich (he): all I need to do is convert from
David Schaich (he): 3 headers times in the cube. This factor, with ties, h parts and C is in the parentheses is the same, so that will cancel out so inviting
David Schaich (he): 3 0 3
David Schaich (he): in 2,
this place
David Schaich (he): 7 times, 3 quarters times
David Schaich (he): those cancellations of the 3, and then
David Schaich (he): one of those 2 is, we could take 7 5 4, and 2 times 90 is 1, 88, it's a to 3,
David Schaich (he): or we could ultimately express this in terms of the ratio. the functions
David Schaich (he): before over 0 3.
David Schaich (he): So, so far are you?
David Schaich (he): Similarly, with the photon gas is still bearing out. This ratio of
David Schaich (he): data functions is something we've seen before, and the different signs coming from the periodic. All the statistics compared to both of
David Schaich (he): you. Just get a overall back to your room
David Schaich (he): increases the energy compared to the case for the proton gas.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): to take the next step toward the equation of States. we need the pressure of the neutral gas. which is a derivative they they can add cost of entry. So we need the interview
David Schaich (he): for the phone call. Yes.
David Schaich (he): or
David Schaich (he): really all the the here is to figure out the condition of
David Schaich (he): that should be certainly something. Yes. can it be computed? We have computer that?
David Schaich (he): Yeah, we
David Schaich (he): okay
David Schaich (he): for anthropical potential, the land that our free energy that comes into the relation between energy and intervene that we've derived.
David Schaich (he): We read this here same
David Schaich (he): overall pre-factor we've already seen, but I will now
David Schaich (he): do the same change of variables to X
David Schaich (he): in the economical potential you can pick up. We'll make it great. Do you want me now? 3 factors.
David Schaich (he): my temperature over H far
David Schaich (he): the integral of X squared.
David Schaich (he): Yes.
David Schaich (he): and this is an integral, that. Okay, we won't
David Schaich (he): How to solve manually in this module, where we can recognize that up to assign is the same as all the encounters with the hotel gas.
David Schaich (he): We'd expect it to be just same number. meaning that
David Schaich (he): the overall functional form of the grant, and all the potential is proportional to the point in times 4 h of team. just like the internal energy.
David Schaich (he): so that the interview itself, proportional to
David Schaich (he): Vt. Cubed.
David Schaich (he): I don't want to see you
David Schaich (he): is that It's something to be if we rearrange that
David Schaich (he): you do it. This relation between temperature and volume.
David Schaich (he): and that
David Schaich (he): yeah.
David Schaich (he): the specific number at this integral
David Schaich (he): and all the ways to is another factor of 7
like 4
David Schaich (he): over it. 490 is 360.
David Schaich (he): So that gives us the entropy just for that combination, if you want it for now we will keep our focus on the equation of state.
David Schaich (he): Yeah.
yes.
David Schaich (he): that we need
to
the
David Schaich (he): minus the derivative of the perspective, one
internal energy. fixed entropy.
David Schaich (he): So this is the negative sign.
David Schaich (he): The
David Schaich (he): 7 high, squared over 4 times 3 is 1 20.
David Schaich (he): The derivative with respect to volume of Vt. To the fourth, which is E to the 4,
David Schaich (he): What is the Times V to the minus 4.
David Schaich (he): So 3 of those 4.
David Schaich (he): These the lines went through together.
David Schaich (he): and that is, implementing our condition. So entropy defining the pressure. and when we take the derivative
David Schaich (he): i'll be to the minus one for it, because one over 3D negative signs canceling it's
right.
David Schaich (he): including the to the 4,
David Schaich (he): and I have already pulled out the extra power of one over V. That we get from the derivatives B to the minus one here in his left.
We can't recognize as
David Schaich (he): the internal energy.
of course.
David Schaich (he): into this. Derivative In the first place.
David Schaich (he): this is the same as the hotel gas. all of the different
David Schaich (he): into the energy to the
David Schaich (he): we, the state that we have when I do, I guess the
David Schaich (he): it's the for of the Pressure Times volume being equal to 1 30.
David Schaich (he): The average in terms of energy which you related to the average particle number times the temperature
David Schaich (he): 7 over 3, P. To the 6. That's the ratio.
David Schaich (he): Those data functions.
David Schaich (he): If we plug in those data functions
David Schaich (he): the public 40
David Schaich (he): data, 3
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): absolutely so.
David Schaich (he): It does not change too much as
David Schaich (he): it's. argument increases from 3 to 4. That is the factors that we have in the
David Schaich (he): and point 9 times 7 over 6 overall factor, just about one
David Schaich (he): just below it. we find that. compared to the ideal gas law, we are just yeah, 5%
David Schaich (he): larger pressure with everything else the same.
David Schaich (he): Once we do a fires times it. And
David Schaich (he): but we now go through this full derivation, and our inclusion in terms of how this.
David Schaich (he): the ultimate. the large scale properties that we get out of a statistical physics analysis
David Schaich (he): very similar to the total gas. the only differences being
David Schaich (he): slightly different numerical factors. And in the case of the equation of state.
The different factor is
David Schaich (he): just an extra
David Schaich (he): 7 over 6 compared to the and
David Schaich (he): the physical. A story about why this turns out to be the case. it's just that
David Schaich (he): you. the large volume that we have assumed in order to integrate over
David Schaich (he): for me a momentum represented by the far beyond frequency as they wave
David Schaich (he): that allows for there to be very many energy levels very close to space in particular, a lot of them compared to the number of particles.
David Schaich (he): So that's there is relatively little effect from the poly exclusion principle that says
David Schaich (he): that 2 programs cannot occupy the same energy level. There are so many energy levels to choose from tabs
David Schaich (he): the sorts of
David Schaich (he): collisions. The multiple occupancy is being forbidden by the
David Schaich (he): rare.
David Schaich (he): and their effect is small.
David Schaich (he): just changing it.
David Schaich (he): Factors like 4.9.
David Schaich (he): That's a physical choice of hell to
David Schaich (he): better remember. It makes sense of
David Schaich (he): the full mathematical derivation that we've now called through.